=head1 NAME

INSTALL -- An installation guide for OOQP.

=for html
This page is part of the <A HREF=../index.html> OOQP documentation </A>.

=head1 THE BOTTOM LINE

If you have all the prerequisite packages installed on your system
(see the L<"PREREQUISITES"> section below), then you may type

    ./configure
    make

to build OOQP. If you wish to install the package in a more permanent
location, you may then type

   make install 

Support for external packages such as Ampl, Matlab and PETSc is not
built automatically. See the appropriate sections below for
instructions on how to build interfaces to these packages.

=head1 MICROSOFT WINDOWS

If you intend to build and install OOQP under Microsoft Windows, read
the L<README_Windows|README_Windows> file before you read the remainder of
the current file.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES AND configure

Before discussing the specifics of packages that are needed for OOQP
to be built, we make some general comments about the use of
environment variables and the configure script.

The configure script attempts to determine properties of your system
and compilers automatically. Occasionally, it will be unable to
resolve some aspect of your environment satisfactorily; for example,
the locations of certain external packages. In these cases, the script
will report an error.  You will need to set certain environment
variables (and possibly obtain some additional software) before
re-running configure.

To take one important example, consider the L<BLAS|blas> library,
which is required for a successful build. If configure cannot
determine the location of the BLAS automatically, you will need to set
the LIBBLAS environment variable to the location of the BLAS library
on your system. For most shells, a script of the following form will
suffice:

    LIBBLAS=/some/directory/libblas.a
    export LIBBLAS

(Of course, /some/directory/libblas.a should be replaced by an actual
path to libblas.a.)  For the csh shell, and its derivatives, the form
of the command is as follows.

    setenv LIBBLAS /some/directory/libblas.a

The use of spaces is significant in these examples - particularly the
absence of spaces surrounding the = sign in the first example. If you
are uncertain which shell you are using it is safe to simply try both
these commands; one should work.

For libraries, the value of the environment variable does not need to
be a file name, but may instead be the name of the library as you want
it to appear on the link line. For example, the setting

     LIBBLAS=-lsunperf

is appropriate on some systems. (In this particular case, however,
configure will find the sunperf library automatically).

Once LIBBLAS and other variables of interest are set appropriately,
one may run the configure script by going to the OOQP directory and
typing the following:

     ./configure

This script will copy the values of the environment variables into
appropriate locations, so you do not need to set these variables
permanently (that is, there is no need to modify your .login or
.profile). However, if you need to re-run configure (after fixing some
error or after acquiring additional external packages), you will need
to be sure all appropriate environment variables are set appropriately
before calling the script. It may help to make a note of the
appropriate values.

An alternative approach is to modify the files GNUmakefile and
PetscMakefile by hand to set environment variables
appropriately. However, these files are generated automatically by the
configure script, so any changes you make will be lost next time you
run this script.

=head1 PREREQUISITES

The following packages need to be installed on your system before OOQP
may be built.

=head2 A C++ compiler and a means of compiling FORTRAN 77 files

OOQP is written in standard C++, using only constructs that modern
compilers stably support. Any sufficiently recent C++ compiler
should work with OOQP.

OOQP uses a number of routines from the BLAS and LAPACK FORTRAN 77
libraries. C++ code that calls these routines adheres to typical
intra-language calling conventions that work for a number of compiler
suites. We recommend that those users who do not have a FORTRAN 77
compiler, or are having difficulty compiling OOQP using their FORTRAN
compiler obtain F2C (see the L<"USING F2C"> section below.)

We remark that the GNU C++ and FORTRAN (gfortran) compilers build OOQP
correctly.

=head2 A UNIX-like environment

You may compile OOQP under any operating system you wish, but the
installation instructions in the current file require the use of
UNIX-style system utilities. For instructions on how to build OOQP
under Microsoft Windows, see the L<README_Windows|README_Windows> file.

=head2 GNU make

A utility to maintain groups of programs. GNU make is freely and
widely available, yields predictable performance across a wide variety
of platforms, and has a number of useful features absent in many
vendor-provided versions of make.You almost certainly have a version
of make installed, which may or may not be GNU make. To find out,
type:
 
    make --version

If you get anything other than a message telling you that this is a
version of GNU make, try
 
    gmake --version

and finally

    gnumake --version

If none of these succeed, then GNU make probably is not installed on
your system. You may obtain a copy at http://www.gnu.org. Although our
makefiles are not too elaborate, we do use some features of GNU make.

=head2 BLAS

The BLAS (Basic Linear Algebra Subproblems) is a collection of
routines that perform common linear-algebra operations used in
scientific computing. Because these operations are so fundamental, a
great deal of effort has gone into ensuring that they are implemented
correctly and efficiently on various architectures. The BLAS may
already be installed on your machine. If not, you must obtain a
version and install it.

A Fortran reference implementation of the BLAS may be found at
http://www.netlib.org/blas/index.html, but it is preferable to use a
machine-optimized library if one is available. Most Linux
distributions have a prepackaged version of BLAS that may be installed
using the distribution's package manager.  Information about
obtaining optimized versions of the BLAS for other architectures may
be found on the Netlib page http://www.netlib.org/blas/index.html

The configure script will first test whether your compiler suite can
find the BLAS library in a standard system location. If unsuccessful,
it will search for the file in the following location in the OOQP
distribution:

	extras/blas/libblas.a.  

Therefore, one option is to move an appropriate libblas.a file
manually to this location.

If the configure script fails to find a BLAS library in the locations
above, you will need to set the LIBBLAS environment variable
explicitly to point to it. See L<ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES AND configure>
for information on how to do so.

=head2 MA27 or MA57

MA27 and MA57 are codes for solving sparse symmetric indefinite linear
systems. To build the default general QP solver, you must have one of
those two codes installed.

These codes are part of HSL (formerly the Harwell Subroutine
Library), a collection of ISO Fortran codes for large scale scientific
computation. 

MA27 is the default solver used with OOQP. MA57 supersedes MA27, but
MA57 has more restrictive licensing requirements. We find that the
MA57 version of the OOQP solver outperforms the MA27 version in
general, but performance of the MA27 version is also acceptable.

To obtain MA27, go to 

  http://hsl.rl.ac.uk/archive/hslarchive.html

You will need the double precision versions of the MA27, FD05, ID05
and ZA02 packages, which you should save to files named ma27.f, fd05.f
id05.f and za02.f respectively.  The FD05, ID05 and ZA02 packages are
machine-dependent. Most users will want to download the default
version of these packages (generic IEEE or generic Unix), but read the
options carefully to see if a version specific to your hardware or OS
is available. Contact the maintainers of the HSL archive if you cannot
determine which version of these packages is appropriate to your
system. We note that the default version of these packages is
appropriate for users running Linux on Intel hardware.

Move the downloaded FORTRAN (.f) files to the

	extras/MA27/ 

subdirectory of the OOQP distribution directory. From within this
directory, type

     ./configure
     make 

to generate the file "libMA27.a". 

The configure script will look for libMA27.a in this directory extras/MA27.

If MA27 is already installed on your system, of if you wish to install
MA27 in a different location, you may need to set the LIBMA27
environment variable to point to this library. See L<ENVIRONMENT
VARIABLES AND configure> for information on how to do so.

The procedure for MA57 is similar, once you have obtained (and
licensed) a copy of the MA57 source from the HSL collection. See 

     http://www.hsl.rl.ac.uk/

for details on obtaining MA57 and other HSL codes.  Once you have
obtained MA57, unpack the files into

	extras/MA57 

and follow the procedure outlined above for MA27.

=head1 WHAT WILL BE BUILT

The command

    make

will build several executables in the current directory along with
libraries containing the OOQP development framework in lib/. It will
also copy the OOQP header files into include/. See the
L<README|README> file for a description of the conventions used to
name the executables. One of the executables created will be

     qpgen-sparse-gondzio.exe

This is the default solver that takes QPS files as input and uses MA27
to solve linear systems. Use of this solver is described extensively
in the OOQP User Guide (doc/ooqp-userguide.pdf).

Interfaces of the qpgen solver to external packages, such as Ampl and
Matlab, and variants that use linear solvers other than MA27 (such as
MA57) are not built by default. To build the MA57-based version of the
qpgen solver, you first need to install MA57 and set the LIBMA57
environment variable appropriately. Then type
   
    make all-ma57

One of the executables created will be

   qpgen-sparse-ma57-gondzio.exe

which has the same functionality as qpgen-sparse-gondzio.exe.

The libraries that are built by the "make" command and moved to lib/
will be similarly incomplete. They will include libraries for those
versions of OOQP which we anticipate that users will wish to embed as
subroutines in their own problems. Please refer to the OOQP User Guide
for further information, and contact the developers if you need a
library that is not currently supplied.

Users who wish to create a new QP solver customized to a particular
problem structure, or perform similarly intense development with OOQP,
may wish to work in the OOQP src/ directory rather that relying on the
libraries generated by the default build. Instructions on working with
the OOQP course can be found in the OOQP User Guide.

=head1 INTERFACES TO EXTERNAL PACKAGES

OOQP has interfaces to several external packages.

=head2 Ampl

OOQP may be invoked to solve convex QPs from within the modeling
language Ampl. To use the OOQP Ampl interface, you must install the
Ampl solver library and library headers. There are links to the
required code on the official site http://www.ampl.com/hooking.html.
The code may also be found at the Netlib repository at the URL
http://www.netlib.org/ampl/solvers/.

The Ampl solvers source distribution contains a README that describes
how to build the Ampl solvers library.  These instructions have
changed from time to time, so we are unable to give specific
instructions here.  Follow the directions in README and build the
library. Find the directory containing the file amplsolvers.a.  Set
the environment variable AMPL_SOLVERS to the full path of the
directory containing amplsolvers.a.  See L<ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES AND
configure> for information on how to do so.

Once AMPL_SOLVERS has been set, and other prerequisites for OOQP have
been satisfied (see L<"PREREQUISITES">), run ./configure in the OOQP
source directory and then type

     make ooqp-ampl

=head2 Matlab

OOQP may be invoked from within Matlab. Instructions on how to build
this interface may be found in the L<README_Matlab|README_Matlab>
file.

=head2 PETSc

Some solvers in OOQP use the PETSc package from Argonne National
Laboratory to perform linear algebra operations. Before the OOQP-PETSc
interface can be build, you must install PETSc on your system.  See
the PETSc home page at http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/index.html for
information.

Once PETSc has been installed, run the OOQP configure script, as
usual. Then type

     make -f PetscMakefile all_petsc

As part of the PETSc installation process you will set certain
environment variables, such as PETSC_DIR and BOPT. These must remain
set while building the OOQP-PETSc interface. These variables are used
by the PETSc build system, and are not under the control of the OOQP
build system. We have decided to conform to the PETSc build system as
much as possible when building this interface.

=head2 TAO

TAO is the Toolkit for Advanced Optimization, a software package for
optimization developed at Argonne National Laboratory. The TAO home
page is http://www.mcs.anl.gov/tao/

OOQP may be invoked as a solver from within TAO. This interface is
maintained jointly by the TAO and OOQP developers, and is distributed
with TAO, rather than with OOQP. The current version of this interface
uses PETSc to perform its underlying linear algebra operations.
Before you build the OOQP-TAO interface, you must build the OOQP-PETSc
interface as described above.

=head1 USING F2C

F2C is a FORTRAN to C translator that may be obtained from
http://www.netlib.org/f2c. We have had no difficulty compiling OOQP
using the output from this translator. We recommend using F2C if you
are having difficulty compiling OOQP using your FORTRAN compiler (or
if you don't have a FORTRAN compiler.)

Once the f2c translator is installed, you may type

     f2c *.f

in any directory containing FORTRAN files that you wish to
translate. The OOQP build system will try to compile the translated C
files, rather than the original FORTRAN files. (Actually, this behavior
is not unique to OOQP, but is rather a default of GNU make.) You must
be sure that the compiler can find the include file f2c.h. You may,
for instance, copy this include file into any directory containing
translated FORTRAN files.

If you are using f2c instead of a FORTRAN compiler, be sure to set the
FLIBS environment to point to the F2C library, which is typically
named libf2c.a. Then run configure like this

    ./configure --without-fortran

so that configure knows not to check the properties of the FORTRAN
compiler.


=head1 PERFORMANCE TUNING

Many compilers perform useful optimizations. These optimizations are
specified by particular compiler flags. The configure script doesn't
ask the compiler to perform any optimizations beyond the basic ones
indicated by the compile flag C<-O>.

Users who are aware of a good set of compiler flags may wish to set
the following environment variables before running configure:

=over 4

=item * 

FFLAGS -- Compiler flags for the Fortran compiler.

=item * 

CFLAGS -- Compiler flags for the C compiler.

=item *

CXXFLAGS -- compiler flags for the C++ compiler.

=back

The libraries and executables will be built using those flags. Of
particular importance are the flags used to compile 
L<MA27 or MA57|ma27 or ma57>. Also, the quality of the L<BLAS|blas> library can
affect performance greatly, so use an optimized version where
possible.

We have found the following flags useful on the following systems:

=over 4

=item  Linux (gcc version 2.95.3)

Set FFLAGS, CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS to C<-funroll-loops -O3 -mcpu=i586>

=item Solaris (SunPro compilers)

Set FFLAGS, CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS to C<-fast>

=back

=head1 INSTALLATION LOCATION

After building the executables and libraries, you may use them
directly from within the current directory. Optionally, you may
install them in a more permanent location.  If you type

   make install

(after running the configure script), the make utility attempts to
install the executables and libraries into the /usr/local directory
tree. Of course, you will be unable to install to this location unless
you have privileged access to the machine. Furthermore, even if you
have privileged access, your system administrator may require you to
install new packages in a different location.

If you are unsure that the package should be installed in /usr/local,
we recommend that you install in $HOME/software (the pattern $HOME
will be expanded to the full path of your home directory). You can do
this by typing:

        ./configure --prefix=$HOME/software
        make install

The PREFIX variable will now be set to the value you have assigned in
the configure option (in this case $HOME/software).

The following items will be installed:

=over 4

=item *

The OOQP libraries will be installed in $PREFIX/lib.

=item *

The OOQP headers will be installed in $PREFIX/include/ooqp.

=item *

The OOQP executables will be installed in $PREFIX/bin.

=item *

The OOQP documentation will be installed in
$PREFIX/share/doc/packages/ooqp.

=back

=head1 TROUBLESHOOTING

=head2 The configure script did not complete successfully.

This could occur because your system does not have the environment
needed to build OOQP. (For instance, your FORTRAN compiler cannot
create executables.)  It could also be a bug in the configure
script. If you suspect the latter, please contact the OOQP developers.

=head2 The program "make" terminates immediately without building OOQP.

If typing "make" results in

        make: Fatal error: No arguments to build

or some similar message, then the version of make that you are using
is probably not GNU make. Try typing "gmake" instead. If this also
fails, it is likely that GNU make is not installed on your system. See
PREREQUISITES for more information.

=for html
Back to the <A HREF=../index.html> Documentation Roadmap </A>.

=cut
